Lucy Westenra is a fictional character in the novel Dracula (1897) by Bram Stoker. She is the 19-year-old daughter of a wealthy family. Her father is mentioned in the novel when Mina says he was a sleepwalker and her elderly mother is simply stated as being Mrs. Westenra. Lucy is introduced as Mina Murray's best friend. In the 1931 Universal production, she is called Lucy Weston. In the 1958 Hammer horror production, she is called Lucy Holmwood and is engaged to Jonathon Harker.
Contents  [hide] 
1 In Dracula
2 Appearances in movies
2.1 Character in Nosferatu
2.2 Lucy Weston
2.3 Lucy/Mina amalgams
2.4 Lucy Westenra
2.5 Lucy Westerman
3 On stage
4 In comics
5 Radio
In Dracula[edit source | editbeta]

Lucy Westenra is a vivacious young woman who is much praised for her beauty, purity and sweet nature. These qualities earn her three suitors, all of whom propose to her on the same day: (Arthur Holmwood, wealthy son of Lord Godalming; Quincey Morris, an American cowboy; and Doctor John Seward, an asylum psychiatrist.)
Lucy accepts Arthur's proposal, but soon begins suffering from severe anaemia. She has, in fact, become the victim of Count Dracula, who is slowly draining her of blood. Despite the best efforts of Dr. Seward and Dr. Abraham Van Helsing, Lucy's condition rapidly deteriorates. Dr. Van Helsing correctly identifies the true cause of her illness, and puts up garlic around her sickbed to repel Dracula. Even after four blood transfusions (from Holmwood, Seward, Van Helsing, and Morris, respectively) and although the doctors try to keep a constant vigil over her condition, their efforts prove futile. Lucy and her mother die together when a wolf controlled by Dracula (or in some cases, is Dracula) comes crashing through the window while the two women are left unattended. The mother dies from a heart attack, while Dracula drains Lucy to the point of near death.
The men find her the next morning barely alive; they try a transfusion, but by this point it's much too late, as the bite marks on her throat have vanished and her teeth now sport longer canines. For a moment, when Arthur is near her, she requests a kiss, while turning much more voluptuous. Helsing pulls Arthur away, knowing that it is the monster talking, and not Lucy. Lucy, also realizing she's becoming inhuman, asks Van Helsing to protect Arthur. Helsing swears to do so for Lucy's sake, just as she passes away. The men think it's over, but Helsing knows that with Lucy's death, her transformation into the undead is just beginning. It is more than likely that what they witnessed was the last of her humanity fading away.
Sure enough, after her death reports of children being attacked at night are heard, with each child claiming it was the "Bloofer Lady" (child speak for "Beautiful Lady"). The children also have bite marks on their throats, though none of their blood has been seriously drained. Dr Van Helsing realizes that Lucy has now risen as a vampire, and asks Dr Seward, Arthur, and Quincey to help him destroy the undead creature. When they doubt him, Helsing leads Seward with him at first to show him first-hand - first by showing that Lucy's coffin is empty, and then waiting when she comes with another child to feed on. She once again only takes a little blood before leaving the child and heading back to her crypt. Van Helsing and Seward make sure the child is all right and go into the crypt where the coffin now contains Lucy's body. However, as Helsing points out, Lucy's body hasn't decayed a day since her death, as the undead never age.
That next night, Van Helsing gathers the rest of the men and puts a holy plaster over Lucy's crypt while she's out feeding. The men wait for her to come back where they see the monstrous form she's now become. She is now seen as sexually attractive instead of innocently sweet, and has lost her purity. They confront her, stopping her from biting her current victim. She throws the child she is feeding from to the ground, showing how she has lost her innocence and any maternal instincts. Upon seeing Arthur, Lucy changes her tone and stance and acts as though still alive, beckoning him to come to her so they can be undead together. Her hypnotic spell almost works until Helsing flashes a cross at her, repelling her. She flees to her crypt, but is unable to enter until Helsing removes some of the plaster. Even with the small space, the men are astonished as Lucy uses her powers to slip inside as if it was nothing. The men soon follow and find Lucy in her coffin, resting. Van Helsing explains to the others that the Lucy they know is indeed dead, and the figure they see now is a monster in her form, the result of vampirism if a victim has been fully drained. He warns that unless she is stopped, she will continue her nightly feedings to the point of fully draining her victims, who likewise will become undead and continue the cycle, building up Dracula's army. Arthur hammers a stake into her, in a scene which is considered to be metaphoric for consummating their marriage while establishing phallic male dominance.
Van Helsing feels it best that the men who loved Lucy in life play a role in freeing her soul. On his instructions, they stake Lucy, destroying the vampire part of her, and Lucy is finally able to rest in peace. However, just to be sure Dracula does not reclaim her, Van Helsing has the grisly task of cutting off her head and stuffing her mouth full of garlic as a precaution.
Lucy is seen as a foil to Mina Harker, Jonathan Harker's wife. Where Mina is demure and shy Lucy is bubbly and enjoys the attention of men, although she only confesses this once, to Mina, and feels guilty for it. She expresses a fleeting desire to marry all three of the men who propose to her, which is seen by some as the reason she is chosen as Dracula's first victim - she is more open to experiences and her own desires than Mina, although she shares Mina's almost worship-like admiration to men, calling them kind and fairer than women.
Appearances in movies[edit source | editbeta]

Character in Nosferatu[edit source | editbeta]
Ruth Landshoff made a few brief appearances as a character similar to Lucy in the 1922 German silent film Nosferatu.
The character of Lucy Harker is based on Lucy Westenra in the film Nosferatu: Phantom der Nacht. She is played by Isabelle Adjani.
Lucy Weston[edit source | editbeta]
Frances Dade was the first young woman to play the role in the cinema in the first film of Universal Studios' Dracula series, though her character was credited as Lucy Weston. In the Spanish-language version, Carmen Guerrero portrays Lucia Weston. In both films, her death after becoming a vampire occurs off-screen, and is only implied in the English version.
Actress Susan George played another Lucy Weston in a televised version of Dracula in 1968.
In December, 2010, Simon and Schuster (Gallery Books) released "The Secret History of Elizabeth Tudor, Vampire Slayer" purportedly as told to Lucy Weston.
Lucy/Mina amalgams[edit source | editbeta]
In 1958, Hammer Films' Horror of Dracula has a character based on Lucy Westenra. In this version, Lucy is Arthur Holmwood's sister, and her fiancé is Jonathan Harker. She becomes a victim, and later "bride" of Dracula as revenge against Jonathan Harker for destroying his former bride. Lucy meets the same fate as her literary character, although she tries to attack Arthur before being destroyed. She is played by Carol Marsh.
Kate Nelligan plays Lucy Seward in 1979's Dracula starring Frank Langella. Lucy's character is similar to Mina Murray's in the novel, and Broadway play version. This character survives Dracula's power, and only momentarily becomes his bride, whereas Mina is killed early on.
Lucy Westenra[edit source | editbeta]
In 1970, Soledad Miranda portrayed Lucy Westenra, opposite Christopher Lee as Count Dracula, in Jesus Franco's version of the film.
Dan Curtis's 1973 version of Dracula starred Fiona Lewis as Lucy Westenra. In this version, Lucy's character was Dracula's reincarnated love.
The BBC's faithful version of Dracula saw Susan Penhaligon as Lucy Westenra in 1977. This version was first aired in the US as part of the Great Performances series.


Sadie Frost as Lucy in the 1992 adaptation of Dracula.
In Bram Stoker's Dracula (1992), directed by Francis Ford Coppola, Lucy is played by Sadie Frost. Lucy is eroticized much further than her literary incarnation, becoming more than seductive and coquettish, even tempting, and what she says often refers to sex. As a spoiled child of aristocracy, she talks with artlessness and frankness. Unlike her friend Mina, who stays resolute, Lucy's sexual tendencies are to be her downfall. She is drawn into Dracula’s claws because of her somnambulism crisis. Dracula then rapes her in the garden. Henceforth, she slowly transforms into a vampire, and has to be slain by Van Helsing and her beloved fiancé in order to be saved from damnation.
Lucy Westenra was played by Lysette Anthony in Mel Brooks' parody Dracula: Dead and Loving It (1995).
Lucy Westenra was played by Bai Ling in Michael Oblowitz' 2001 movie The Breed.
In 2002, dancer Tara Birtwhistle assumed the role of Lucy Westenra in a ballet/silent film version of Dracula, called Dracula: Pages from a Virgin's Diary, directed by Guy Maddin. This adaptation portrays Lucy's character more frequently then any other films.
Lucy's character remained largely unchanged in BBC One's 2006 adaptation of Dracula, where she was played by Sophia Myles, although she serves as an unintentional catalyst for events as her new husband, Arthur Holmwood, arranges for Dracula to come to Britain in the hope that Dracula will be able to cure him of the syphilis that prevents Holmwood consummating his marriage to Lucy.
Lucy Westenra was played by Asia Argento in the 2012 film Dracula 3D.
In the NBC production of Dracula, to air fall 2013, Lucy Westenra will be played by Katie McGrath.
Lucy Westerman[edit source | editbeta]
In 2000, Colleen Fitzpatrick (aka Vitamin C) plays Lucy, whose last name has been changed to Westerman in Dracula 2000. This version of Lucy becomes the third of Dracula's vampire brides. The name of her character is actually a slight jab from the original novel and has no relation to the Westenra character. Before being turned, Lucy herself states this, mentioning she was named after the Peanuts character.
On stage[edit source | editbeta]

In 1927, Dorothy Peterson originated the role of Lucy Seward in the Broadway stage play version of Dracula. In this version the characters of Lucy and Mina were combined to create Dr. Seward's daughter, who falls under Dracula's power but is saved from death at the end of the play.
Marcella Gaudel starred as Lucy in the revival of the play in 1931.
Ann Sachs played the role of Lucy, in yet another revival of the play in 1977. Lauren Thompson replaced Sachs in the role some time later before the play closed in 1980.
In Argentina, Drácula, el musical by Pepe Cibrián and Angel Mahler : Lucy: Paola Krum (1991 y 1992), Alejandra Radano (1994), Karina K (1997), Romina Groppo (2000), Georgina Frere (2003), Florencia Benítez (2007), Georgina Reynaldi (2007), Luna Perez Lening (2011).
Drácula Siglo XXI by Argentina´s composer Pablo Flores Torres Lucy Westenra: Gabriela Moya Grgic (2011)
Dracula, The Musical opened on Broadway in 2004. Lucy Westenra plays a less-than-crucial part. She is very much like the novel, though in this version Dracula originally targeted Mina Murray, but Lucy becomes his victim when she answers Dracula's call. She dies, a victim of the count, and rises as an undead vampire. She is destroyed by the men, as in the novel, but Mina is shown severely mourning her. The role has been played by Kelli O'Hara.
In 2006, Gabrielle Destroismaisons portrayed Lucy in a French Canadian musical production Dracula - Entre l'amour et la mort.
In comics[edit source | editbeta]

Lucy appears in Marvel Comics adaptation of Bram Stoker's Dracula # 2-3. Lucy is portrayed as in the novel as a dark haired nineteen-year-old beauty who is killed along with her mother by Count Dracula in 1890 after Abraham Van Helsing tries to save her life.
Topps Comics also did a comics adaption of the film Bram Stoker's Dracula.
In 2008, Ben Caldwell created a very short version of Dracula as the first in his series All-Action Classics. In it, Lucy is a beautiful young woman who, while being visited by her friend Mina, is struck with sleepwalking and anemia, but this is discovered to be the work of Dracula. She dies because of her ignorant maid ruining Van Helsing's plans, and is later, after becoming a vampire, killed for good by her fiancé Arthur.
Her character was used in the 2011 DC Comics Victorian Undead 2: Sherlock Holmes vs Dracula. She is turned by Dracula as followed by the original story. But it deviates from there as Dracula had manage to reach her crypt before Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, Quincy and Harker can kill her due to Holmwood's treachery. She becomes a minion to Dracula and helps with his plan to take over London. During her first confrontation with the heroes, she is horribly scarred when Holmes manages to hit her with a flare. She recovers by turning on Holmwood and feeding on him before leading an ambush with Dracula's brides against the heroes. However, she reveals she's not particularly loyal to Dracula, revelling more in her vampiric power rather than serving him, not even minding she is a monster now. She is immune to religious symbols, considering herself "enlighten" from Dracula's other brides since she was turned in the recent times. However as Lucy trades insights with Helsing (who sees her as suffering the curse of the undead, while she sees it as a blessing, although more than likely it's the corrupt version of her talking) she realizes that she is outmatched as the brides are killed. Lucy then proposes a deal with the men, killing the last bride for them in exchange for not coming after her while she likewise will leave them be. Her last words are an apology to Jonathan for the death of Mina (who in this version killed herself before she turned) though more for the fact that Mina "doesn't know what she's missing" before escaping. Her fate is left unresolved as the heroes have to make Dracula their top priority after he infiltrates Buckingham Palace to try and kill the Queen and take over London. At the end of the mini-series, she is the only vampire not accounted for and is still at large through London.
Radio[edit source | editbeta]

In 1938, the CBS radio series The Mercury Theatre on the Air made its debut with Dracula. Lucy appears in the middle of the broadcast as the ill fiancée of Arthur Seward, and it is only later established that she is a victim of Dracula. She becomes a vampiress and is destroyed by Arthur and Van-Helsing. Elizabeth Farrell performed as Lucy, opposite legend Orson Welles in a dual role as both Dracula and Arthur Seward.
