Scallops from Port Phillip Bay are back on the menu, with the state government to issue a single fishing licence for the marine bivalves for the first time since the late 1990s.
But the government's decision to allow large commercial operations to bid for the licence has angered a local dive fishery outfit that says it has invested years of research into re-establishing depleted stocks and fears it will now be shut out of the bidding process.
Scallop fishing in Port Phillip Bay was shut down in 1997, after dredging methods depleted stocks.
Cheap frozen imported scallops from China soon became standard fare in all but top-tier restaurants.
Advertisement  
Agriculture Minister Peter Walsh said on Tuesday the government was prepared to re-establish the industry, in the form of a niche, hand-harvested commercial scallop fishery with strict rules.
More than 120 submissions were received after the government called for public comment in April on its proposal for a small dive fishery for scallops.
''The submissions show broad support for the new fishery, which will create business and employment opportunities and improve supply of locally caught fresh scallops,'' Mr Walsh said.
The licence will be restricted to an initial level of 12 tonnes of scallops a year, with no more than two tonnes coming from any one of six sub-zones in Port Phillip Bay.
The restrictions will be reviewed after 12 months.
The licence, though exclusive, is estimated to gross about $180,000 a year with a profit of about $20,000, according to a submission from Seafood Industry Australia.
Mr Walsh said the single entitlement for the new fishery would be allocated by auction.
Fishing expert Rex Hunt welcomed the announcement, in a sharp turnaround from his previous opposition. In 1997, Hunt publicly vowed to fight the ''thugs in the scallop industry'' and their dredging of Port Phillip Bay.
He was instrumental in persuading the Victorian government, led by premier Jeff Kennett, to ban dredge-fishing of scallops.
Mr Hunt told Fairfax Media he supported any measures to create a sustainable fishing industry.
''It is the methods used that have been a concern,'' he said. ''I am totally comfortable with the idea of dive, hand-harvested scallops.''
The decision to auction the licence has angered fisheries scientist and abalone and scallop diver Grant Leeworthy, who heads the Port Phillip Bay Scallop Dive Fishery Association.
Mr Leeworthy has lobbied various governments, investing time and research with his small team of scientists, to replenish stocks.
He said he could not afford to bid alongside larger ''disinterested'' commercial outfits and believed his team's work should have been viewed by the government as a start-up capital project.
