ETHEREAL is a word not commonly associated with food, unless you're discussing dumplings with chef Tony Tan.
Tan, the Melbourne Food and Wine Festival's cultural consultant, offers that exact description when asked about the key to a top dumpling.
"A really great dumpling should be really very small and it should be no more than a mere mouthful. So, in other words, you eat the dumpling in two mouthfuls and it's gone," he says.
"It's very effervescent or it's very ethereal from that perspective.
Advertisement
"The word itself in Chinese or in Mandarin ... it's the same character, it's dim sum. Dim means to touch ... sum means the heart, so that means it just hits your heart very lightly, you eat it and it's gone."
As part of the Melbourne Food and Wine Festival, Tan is hosting visits to some of Chinatown's most notable dumpling houses. The three Dumpling Crawl sessions (March 19 to 21) sold out well in advance.
He said the idea was to explain the various types of dumpling, according to certain traditions.
Australians, he said, were familiar with Cantonese yum cha.
"The two words just mean to drink tea and as part of the tea-drinking tradition, they offer dumplings to sort of help wash the tea down," Tan said.
"The Chinese dumpling chef is forever thinking about ways to entice people to drink more tea or to eat more dumplings, so therefore it creates that creativity. So they come up with more and more dumplings."
Others included the Shanghainese dim sum and the lesser-known Chiu Chow dumplings, Tan said.
"Chiu Chow dumplings come from a different tradition - it's a similar tradition, but ... they have come up with some really very interesting and innovative dim sum items," he said.
That includes the 'pomegranate' dumpling, which Tan says can be filled with chicken or pork and shaped to resemble a pouch. That dumpling earns its name due to its appearance.
Tan said he wanted people to appreciate that dumplings were not only a "palatable pleasure", and praised Neil Perry for his understanding of Chinese cuisine.
"He has adopted the whole tradition of offering dumplings in different forms at his restaurant, Spice Temple," Tan said.
This is a subject Tan is passionate about - "I think I have got dumplings in my bloodstream - that is the problem". Melburnians, it seems, based on the demand for Tan's Dumpling Crawl sessions, are too.
Tony Tan's selection
Xiao long bao or Shanghai steamed pork dumplings, Hutong Dumpling Bar (Melbourne CBD)
These dumplings encased in broth demonstrate the mastery of the dumpling master as these little critters are so difficult to make and so delicious to eat. Their Sichuan-style pork dumplings with chilli oil are ace too.
Pomegranate dumplings, Mask of China (Melbourne CBD)
A Chiu Chow restaurant, their dumplings are somewhat different to those from Cantonese and Shanghainese traditions. Perhaps the best examples are the pomegranate dumplings filled with diced pork or prawns, bamboo and mushrooms and the garlic chive dumplings called Chiu Chow fun gor.
Cantonese hand-chopped siu mai and har gao, Yum Cha Cafe (Melbourne CBD)
These two classics are standard-bearers of Cantonese dumplings. The former is made with minced pork and sometimes water chestnuts encased in a wonton wrapper and the latter consists of prawns wrapped in wheat starch pastry.
Char siu bao, Red Emperor (Southbank)
Another Cantonese classic, the roast pork (char siu) dumpling here is moist and the soft bun is one of the best in Melbourne.
Beijing dumpling with pork, Dumpling King (Box Hill)
A local institution, their rustic pan-fried Beijing dumpling with filled pork can sometimes be one of the best in town. Also known as pot stickers, these dumplings with the crispy base are the fore-runners of the Japanese gyoza.
