Family violence perpetrators are being turned away from programs to change men's behaviour, with half of those offered in Melbourne no longer taking referrals.
No To Violence, the state-funded peak body of organisations that work with family violence perpetrators, has written to Minister for Community Services Mary Wooldridge warning of an "ever-increasingly perilous situation".
The association's executive officer, Danny Blay, said a "demand crisis" had led to increasing numbers of men being turned away from programs.
"No To Violence is increasingly concerned that this situation is placing women and children at further risk as there are currently few if any accountability measures for men who are not able to gain access to programs," Mr Blay wrote.
Advertisement  
He said that 14 of the state's 39 behaviour change programs informed the association and the Men's Referral Service last month that they had closed their waiting lists, and many would not accept new referrals until February.
Men who attend the programs do so either voluntarily, or by court order or referral after a family violence intervention order hearing.
A police crackdown on family violence has spurred demand for the programs – which teach men about the impact of their behaviour and aim to stamp out violence.
Chief Commissioner Ken Lay recently said more than a third of all crimes against the person committed last financial year related to family violence. The latest annual crime statistics show the number of family violence offences rose by 21.6 per cent in the past year.
A spokesman for Ms Wooldridge said Victoria was recognised as a leader in men's behaviour change programs, and delivered more than half of the programs in Australia.
He said the state government was aware of increased demand for the programs, and had committed an extra $2.1 million to fund a 22 per cent increase in available places in voluntary programs.
"The Department of Human Services has already met with Mr Blay to discuss allocation of this funding to best target locations with the highest need."
But Mr Blay said state government funding was a "drop in the ocean".
"That takes it up to about 3000 funded places in Victoria annually compared to 61,000 family violence reports just to police."
He said a surge in referrals meant program workers were unable to manage risks and courts often did not investigate whether men were complying with the conditions of intervention orders.
"NTV has grave concerns for women and children when men might be under the impression that they no longer need to be accountable to a system that cannot cope."
Opposition crime prevention spokeswoman Jill Hennessy said the state government was not investing enough in family violence prevention.
"They are caught up in the response side of the cycle. Unless we start preventing family violence, the demand on the system and the destruction of people's lives is going to continue."
She said many agencies were working with more men than they were funded for.
Victoria's Federation of Community Legal Centres senior policy adviser, Chris Atmore, said the programs lacked the resources to help men from diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds.
"Men from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds are unlikely to get into men's behaviour programs because they don't have the resources."
The federation was among the "stakeholders" in the family violence sector who the Sentencing Advisory Council interviewed for a study on changes in the way offenders have been punished over time.
The stakeholders told the council that the number of offenders ordered to complete such programs as part of a condition of an intervention order had significantly increased in recent years, potentially because the number of counselling orders had grown generally.