Iran nuclear issue and Syria to dominate UN assembly
The UN General Assembly's annual meeting starts in New York on Tuesday, with the focus on talks between Iranian and US officials, and the Syria crisis.
US President Barack Obama is expected to signal a new openness towards Iran in an address to the assembly.
His new Iranian counterpart, Hassan Rouhani, has meanwhile said he wants to present his country's "true face".
A meeting between the two men - the first such encounter since the 1979 revolution - has not been ruled out.
On Thursday, Iran's Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif will discuss its nuclear programme with US Secretary of State John Kerry and other diplomats.
A foreign ministry spokeswoman in Tehran said the meeting represented the "beginning for nuclear talks in the new era".
Mr Kerry will also seek to iron out differences over Syria with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov in New York.
The two men will try to resolve their stances on how to ensure Syria hands over its chemical weapons.
Earlier this month, Russia and the US agreed a deal under the terms of which Syria's chemical weapons arsenal must be removed or destroyed by mid-2014.
However, differences have since emerged over whether the deal should be enforced by a UN Security Council resolution under Chapter VII of the organisation's charter, which would authorise sanctions and the use of force if Syria did not comply with its obligations.
Open approach
The meeting including Mr Zarif and Mr Kerry is due to take place on the sidelines of the 68th United Nations General Assembly and will discuss the dispute over Iran's nuclear programme.
Iran insists it is a peaceful programme, but Western countries suspect it of seeking to develop a nuclear weapon.
The meeting will be attended by foreign ministers from the other four permanent UN Security Council members - the UK, China, France and Russia - and also Germany, who make up the so-called P5+1.
Mr Rouhani has said he is ready to restart stalled nuclear talks without preconditions. There is speculation that he and US President Barack Obama may shake hands on the sidelines of the General Assembly.
The White House said a meeting had not been ruled out, but Iranian officials have downplayed the likeliness of it happening.
The two men recently exchanged letters over the nuclear issue.
Western ministers will want to see an Iranian willingness to make concessions on its nuclear programme if there is to be any lifting or lightening of UN and Western sanctions, BBC diplomatic correspondent Jonathan Marcus says.
Iran for its part will want a clear indication that the US is willing to treat Iran with the respect it believes it deserves as a significant regional player, he adds.
The EU's foreign policy chief, Baroness Catherine Ashton, met Mr Zarif on Monday and described their discussion as "good and constructive." She said her team would hold talks with Mr Zarif again in October in Geneva to assess progress.
Last week, Mr Rouhani said that his country would never "seek weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons", and that his goal was "constructive engagement" with the international community.
Meanwhile, Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff is to be the first world leader to address the General Assembly, and is expected to refer to a row between Brazil and the US following leaks about Washington's cyber-spying operations.
The US National Security Agency (NSA) is alleged to have monitored Ms Rousseff's emails and phone calls as well as carrying out widespread surveillance of other Brazilian citizens.