Biddestone is a small, rural and rather picturesque Cotswold village in north west Wiltshire, England, with a population of 457 in 2001.[1] It is situated near Castle Combe, Corsham, Giddeahall and Chippenham. The civil parish includes the smaller settlement of Slaughterford.
Biddestone has a small Norman church (St. Nicholas's), two pubs (the Biddestone Arms, and the White Horse) and a duck pond situated in a green at the centre of the village. There are also two smaller chapels, both of which are closed. There is also a sports ground where football, cricket and tennis are played. This ground is home to Biddestone Football Club, a Western Football League team. A new village hall was opened on this site in 2003.
The settlement dates from Saxon times, though most buildings are from the late 18th century. Towards the edges of the village, the buildings tend to be from the 20th century.
Local industry is mainly agricultural, however most working residents commute to neighbouring towns. As public transport is limited to an infrequent bus service, most travel by car. There is plenty of bed and breakfast accommodation in the village, providing a source of tourism.
The village primary school closed in 1998. Children now travel to By Brook Valley CE Primary School in nearby Yatton Keynell. This was built to amalgamate the small primary schools in Biddestone, Yatton Keynell, Castle Combe and Nettleton. As such, its catchment area includes Biddestone. Declining rural population during the 20th century meant that Biddestone School had only around 30 pupils for many years, making its closure inevitable. There are also several primary schools in neighbouring Corsham which some children may attend. The nearest secondary schools are in Corsham and Chippenham. There is no longer a shop in the village; this closed at around the same time as the school.
Biddestone is located just inside the eastern boundary of the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
The village is represented in parliament by James Gray and in the Wiltshire Council unitary authority by Jane Scott, both Conservatives.

